[Alerting V2][Serverless & 9.5][M2] Rule feature changes from May 2026 (#6687)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/alerting/kibana-alerting-experimental/rules/author-rules.md

<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6524 (alerts) is merged:
For how alert states connect to episodes, refer to [Alert lifecycle](../alerts.md#alert-lifecycle).
-->

## Severity levels [severity-levels]

Severity is a first-class field on alert episodes in the {{alerting-v2-system}}. To set severity, include a column named `severity` in your ES|QL query output and add it to your `KEEP` list. The framework reads that column after each evaluation and maps it to one of five fixed levels:

| Value | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `info` | Informational; lowest urgency |
| `low` | Low-severity condition |
| `medium` | Moderate-severity condition |
| `high` | High-severity condition |
| `critical` | Critical; highest urgency |

Severity matching is case-insensitive. Values that don't match one of the five levels are silently ignored — the alert episode is still created, but `episode.severity` is not set.

Severity is set only on `breached` rule events. `recovered` and `no_data` events don't carry a severity value.

When severity is set, the framework stores two fields on the alert episode:

> - `episode.severity` — the severity value from the most recent breached event (current state).

Author: ```suggestion
- `episode.severity` — The severity value from the most recent breached event (current state).
```

> - `episode.severity_max` — the highest severity level observed across the episode's lifetime. Useful for routing like "this episode peaked at critical."

Author: ```suggestion
- `episode.severity_max` — The highest severity level observed across the episode's lifetime. Useful for routing like "this episode peaked at critical."
```

> Both fields are available for action policy matchers. For the full field reference, see [Rule event and field reference](rule-event-field-reference.md#episode-fields).

Author: ```suggestion
Both fields are available for action policy matchers. Refer to [Rule event and field reference](rule-event-field-reference.md#episode-fields) for more information about these fields.
```
